<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Her Eyes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Her Eyes</h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">Up from the street and the crowds that went,</div>
					<div class="i0">Morning and midnight, to and fro,</div>
					<div class="i0">Still was the room where his days he spent,</div>
					<div class="i0">And the stars were bleak, and the nights were slow.</div>
					<div class="i0">Year after year, with his dream shut fast,</div>
					<div class="i0">He suffered and strove till his eyes were dim,</div>
					<div class="i0">For the love that his brushes had earned at last⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">And the whole world rang with the praise of him.</div>
					<div class="i0">But he cloaked his triumph, and searched, instead,</div>
					<div class="i0">Till his cheeks were sere and his hairs were gray.</div>
					<div class="i0">“There are women enough, God knows,” he said.⁠ ⁠…</div>
					<div class="i0">“There are stars enough⁠—when the sun ‘s away.”</div>
					<div class="i0">Then he went back to the same still room</div>
					<div class="i0">That had held his dream in the long ago,</div>
					<div class="i0">When he buried his days in a nameless tomb,</div>
					<div class="i0">And the stars were bleak, and the nights were slow.</div>
					<div class="i0">And a passionate humor seized him there⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Seized him and held him until there grew</div>
					<div class="i0">Like life on his canvas, glowing and fair,</div>
					<div class="i0">A perilous face⁠—and an angel’s, too.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">Angel and maiden, and all in one⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">All but the eyes.⁠—They were there, but yet</div>
					<div class="i0">They seemed somehow like a soul half done.</div>
					<div class="i0">What was the matter? Did God forget?⁠ ⁠…</div>
					<div class="i0">But he wrought them at last with a skill so sure</div>
					<div class="i0">That her eyes were the eyes of a deathless woman⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">With a gleam of heaven to make them pure,</div>
					<div class="i0">And a glimmer of hell to make them human.</div>
					<div class="i0">God never forgets.⁠—And he worships her</div>
					<div class="i0">There in that same still room of his,</div>
					<div class="i0">For his wife, and his constant arbiter</div>
					<div class="i0">Of the world that was and the world that is.</div>
					<div class="i0">And he wonders yet what her love could be</div>
					<div class="i0">To punish him after that strife so grim ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But the longer he lives with her eyes to see,</div>
					<div class="i0">The plainer it all comes back to him.</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
