<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Octaves</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-57" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Octaves</h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">I</div>
					<div class="i0">To get at the eternal strength of things,</div>
					<div class="i0">And fearlessly to make strong songs of it,</div>
					<div class="i0">Is, to my mind, the mission of that man</div>
					<div class="i0">The world would call a poet. He may sing</div>
					<div class="i0">But roughly, and withal ungraciously ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But if he touch to life the one right chord</div>
					<div class="i0">Wherein God’s music slumbers, and awake</div>
					<div class="i0">To truth one drowsed ambition, he sings well.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">II</div>
					<div class="i0">We thrill too strangely at the master’s touch ;</div>
					<div class="i0">We shrink too sadly from the larger self</div>
					<div class="i0">Which for its own completeness agitates</div>
					<div class="i0">And undetermines us ; we do not feel⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">We dare not feel it yet⁠—the splendid shame</div>
					<div class="i0">Of uncreated failure ; we forget,</div>
					<div class="i0">The while we groan, that God’s accomplishment</div>
					<div class="i0">Is always and unfailingly at hand.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">III</div>
					<div class="i0">To mortal ears the plainest word may ring</div>
					<div class="i0">Fantastic and unheard-of, and as false</div>
					<div class="i0">And out of tune as ever to our own</div>
					<div class="i0">Did ring the prayers of man-made maniacs ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But if that word be the plain word of Truth,</div>
					<div class="i0">It leaves an echo that begets itself,</div>
					<div class="i0">Persistent in itself and of itself,</div>
					<div class="i0">Regenerate, reiterate, replete.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">IV</div>
					<div class="i0">TUMULTUOUSLY void of a clean scheme</div>
					<div class="i0">Whereon to build, whereof to formulate,</div>
					<div class="i0">The legion life that riots in mankind</div>
					<div class="i0">Goes ever plunging upward, up and down,</div>
					<div class="i0">Most like some crazy regiment at arms,</div>
					<div class="i0">Undisciplined of aught but Ignorance,</div>
					<div class="i0">And ever led resourcelessly along</div>
					<div class="i0">To brainless carnage by drunk trumpeters.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">V</div>
					<div class="i0">To me the groaning of world-worshippers</div>
					<div class="i0">Rings like a lonely music played in hell</div>
					<div class="i0">By one with art enough to cleave the walls</div>
					<div class="i0">Of heaven with his cadence, but without</div>
					<div class="i0">The wisdom or the will to comprehend</div>
					<div class="i0">The strangeness of his own perversity,</div>
					<div class="i0">And all without the courage to deny</div>
					<div class="i0">The profit and the pride of his defeat.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">VI</div>
					<div class="i0">WHILE we are drilled in error, we are lost</div>
					<div class="i0">Alike to truth and usefulness. We think</div>
					<div class="i0">We are great warriors now, and we can brag</div>
					<div class="i0">Like Titans ; but the world is growing young,</div>
					<div class="i0">And we, the fools of time, are growing with it :⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">We do not fight to-day, we only die ;</div>
					<div class="i0">We are too proud of death, and too ashamed</div>
					<div class="i0">Of God, to know enough to be alive.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">VII</div>
					<div class="i0">THERE is one battle-field whereon we fall</div>
					<div class="i0">Triumphant and unconquered ; but, alas !</div>
					<div class="i0">We are too fleshly fearful of ourselves</div>
					<div class="i0">To fight there till our days are whirled and blurred</div>
					<div class="i0">By sorrow, and the ministering wheels</div>
					<div class="i0">Of anguish take us eastward, where the clouds</div>
					<div class="i0">Of human gloom are lost against the gleam</div>
					<div class="i0">That shines on Thought’s impenetrable mail.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">VIII</div>
					<div class="i0">WHEN we shall hear no more the cradle-songs</div>
					<div class="i0">Of ages⁠—when the timeless hymns of Love</div>
					<div class="i0">Defeat them and outsound them⁠—we shall know</div>
					<div class="i0">The rapture of that large release which all</div>
					<div class="i0">Right science comprehends; and we shall read,</div>
					<div class="i0">With unoppressed and unoffended eyes,</div>
					<div class="i0">That record of All-Soul whereon God writes</div>
					<div class="i0">In everlasting runes the truth of Him.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">IX</div>
					<div class="i0">THE guerdon of new childhood is repose :⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Once he has read the primer of right thought,</div>
					<div class="i0">A man may claim between two smithy strokes</div>
					<div class="i0">Beatitude enough to realize</div>
					<div class="i0">God’s parallel completeness in the vague</div>
					<div class="i0">And incommensurable excellence</div>
					<div class="i0">That equitably uncreates itself</div>
					<div class="i0">And makes a whirlwind of the Universe.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">X</div>
					<div class="i0">THERE is no loneliness :⁠—no matter where</div>
					<div class="i0">We go, nor whence we come, nor what good friends</div>
					<div class="i0">Forsake us in the seeming, we are all</div>
					<div class="i0">At one with a complete companionship ;</div>
					<div class="i0">And though forlornly joyless be the ways</div>
					<div class="i0">We travel, the compensate spirit-gleams</div>
					<div class="i0">Of Wisdom shaft the darkness here and there,</div>
					<div class="i0">Like scattered lamps in unfrequented streets.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XI</div>
					<div class="i0">WHEN one that you and I had all but sworn</div>
					<div class="i0">To be the purest thing God ever made</div>
					<div class="i0">Bewilders us until at last it seems</div>
					<div class="i0">An angel has come back restigmatized⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Faith wavers, and we wonder what there is</div>
					<div class="i0">On earth to make us faithful any more,</div>
					<div class="i0">But never are quite wise enough to know</div>
					<div class="i0">The wisdom that is in that wonderment.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XII</div>
					<div class="i0">WHERE does a dead man go ?⁠—The dead man dies ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But the free life that would no longer feed</div>
					<div class="i0">On fagots of outburned and shattered flesh</div>
					<div class="i0">Wakes to a thrilled invisible advance,</div>
					<div class="i0">Unchained (or fettered else) of memory ;</div>
					<div class="i0">And when the dead man goes it seems to me</div>
					<div class="i0">‘T were better for us all to do away</div>
					<div class="i0">With weeping, and be glad that he is gone.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XIII</div>
					<div class="i0">STILL through the dusk of dead, blank-legended,</div>
					<div class="i0">And unremunerative years we search</div>
					<div class="i0">To get where life begins, and still we groan</div>
					<div class="i0">Because we do not find the living spark</div>
					<div class="i0">Where no spark ever was ; and thus we die,</div>
					<div class="i0">Still searching, like poor old astronomers</div>
					<div class="i0">Who totter off to bed and go to sleep,</div>
					<div class="i0">To dream of untriangulated stars.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XIV</div>
					<div class="i0">WITH conscious eyes not yet sincere enough</div>
					<div class="i0">To pierce the glimmered cloud that fluctuates</div>
					<div class="i0">Between me and the glorifying light</div>
					<div class="i0">That screens itself with knowledge, I discern</div>
					<div class="i0">The searching rays of wisdom that reach through</div>
					<div class="i0">The mist of shame’s infirm credulity,</div>
					<div class="i0">And infinitely wonder if hard words</div>
					<div class="i0">Like mine have any message for the dead.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XV</div>
					<div class="i0">I GRANT you friendship is a royal thing,</div>
					<div class="i0">But none shall ever know that royalty</div>
					<div class="i0">For what it is till he has realized</div>
					<div class="i0">His best friend in himself. ‘T is then, perforce,</div>
					<div class="i0">That man’s unfettered faith indemnifies</div>
					<div class="i0">Of its own conscious freedom the old shame,</div>
					<div class="i0">And love’s revealed infinitude supplants</div>
					<div class="i0">Of its own wealth and wisdom the old scorn.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XVI</div>
					<div class="i0">THOUGH the sick beast infect us, we are fraught</div>
					<div class="i0">Forever with indissoluble Truth,</div>
					<div class="i0">Wherein redress reveals itself divine,</div>
					<div class="i0">Transitional, transcendent. Grief and loss,</div>
					<div class="i0">Disease and desolation, are the dreams</div>
					<div class="i0">Of wasted excellence ; and every dream</div>
					<div class="i0">Has in it something of an ageless fact</div>
					<div class="i0">That flouts deformity and laughs at years.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XVII</div>
					<div class="i0">WE lack the courage to be where we are :⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">We love too much to travel on old roads,</div>
					<div class="i0">To triumph on old fields ; we love too much</div>
					<div class="i0">To consecrate the magic of dead things,</div>
					<div class="i0">And yieldingly to linger by long walls</div>
					<div class="i0">Of ruin, where the ruinous moonlight</div>
					<div class="i0">That sheds a lying glory on old stones</div>
					<div class="i0">Befriends us with a wizard’s enmity.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XVIII</div>
					<div class="i0">SOMETHING as one with eyes that look below</div>
					<div class="i0">The battle-smoke to glimpse the foeman’s charge,</div>
					<div class="i0">We through the dust of downward years may scan</div>
					<div class="i0">The onslaught that awaits this idiot world</div>
					<div class="i0">Where blood pays blood for nothing, and where life</div>
					<div class="i0">Pays life to madness, till at last the ports</div>
					<div class="i0">Of gilded helplessness be battered through</div>
					<div class="i0">By the still crash of salvatory steel.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XIX</div>
					<div class="i0">To you that sit with Sorrow like chained slaves,</div>
					<div class="i0">And wonder if the night will ever come,</div>
					<div class="i0">I would say this : The night will never come,</div>
					<div class="i0">And sorrow is not always. But my words</div>
					<div class="i0">Are not enough ; your eyes are not enough ;</div>
					<div class="i0">The soul itself must insulate the Real,</div>
					<div class="i0">Or ever you do cherish in this life⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">In this life or in any life⁠—repose.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XX</div>
					<div class="i0">LIKE a white wall whereon forever breaks</div>
					<div class="i0">Unsatisfied the tumult of green seas,</div>
					<div class="i0">Man’s unconjectured godliness rebukes</div>
					<div class="i0">With its imperial silence the lost waves</div>
					<div class="i0">Of insufficient grief. This mortal surge</div>
					<div class="i0">That beats against us now is nothing else</div>
					<div class="i0">Than plangent ignorance. Truth neither shakes</div>
					<div class="i0">Nor wavers; but the world shakes, and we shriek.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XXI</div>
					<div class="i0">NOR jewelled phrase nor mere mellifluous rhyme</div>
					<div class="i0">Reverberates aright, or ever shall,</div>
					<div class="i0">One cadence of that infinite plain-song</div>
					<div class="i0">Which is itself all music. Stronger notes</div>
					<div class="i0">Than any that have ever touched the world</div>
					<div class="i0">Must ring to tell it⁠—ring like hammer-blows,</div>
					<div class="i0">Right-echoed of a chime primordial,</div>
					<div class="i0">On anvils, in the gleaming of God’s forge.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XXII</div>
					<div class="i0">THE prophet of dead words defeats himself :</div>
					<div class="i0">Whoever would acknowledge and include</div>
					<div class="i0">The foregleam and the glory of the real,</div>
					<div class="i0">Must work with something else than pen and ink</div>
					<div class="i0">And painful preparation : he must work</div>
					<div class="i0">With unseen implements that have no names,</div>
					<div class="i0">And he must win withal, to do that work,</div>
					<div class="i0">Good fortitude, clean wisdom, and strong skill.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XXIII</div>
					<div class="i0">To curse the chilled insistence of the dawn</div>
					<div class="i0">Because the free gleam lingers ; to defraud</div>
					<div class="i0">The constant opportunity that lives</div>
					<div class="i0">Unchallenged in all sorrow ; to forget</div>
					<div class="i0">For this large prodigality of gold</div>
					<div class="i0">That larger generosity of thought⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">These are the fleshly clogs of human greed,</div>
					<div class="i0">The fundamental blunders of mankind.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XXIV</div>
					<div class="i0">FOREBODINGS are the fiends of Recreance ;</div>
					<div class="i0">The master of the moment, the clean seer</div>
					<div class="i0">Of ages, too securely scans what is,</div>
					<div class="i0">Ever to be appalled at what is not ;</div>
					<div class="i0">He sees beyond the groaning borough lines</div>
					<div class="i0">Of Hell, God’s highways gleaming, and he knows</div>
					<div class="i0">That Love’s complete communion is the end</div>
					<div class="i0">Of anguish to the liberated man.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0" style="text-align:center;font-variant:small-caps;margin-bottom:0.5em">XXV</div>
					<div class="i0">HERE by the windy docks I stand alone,</div>
					<div class="i0">But yet companioned. There the vessel goes,</div>
					<div class="i0">And there my friend goes with it ; but the wake</div>
					<div class="i0">That melts and ebbs between that friend and me</div>
					<div class="i0">Love’s earnest is of Life’s all-purposeful</div>
					<div class="i0">And all-triumphant sailing, when the ships</div>
					<div class="i0">Of Wisdom loose their fretful chains and swing</div>
					<div class="i0">Forever from the crumbled wharves of Time.</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
