<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Night Before</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-53" epub:type="chapter"><h2 epub:type="title">The Night Before</h2>
<div class="poetry">
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Look you, Dominie ; look you, and listen !</div>
<div class="i0">Look in my face, first ; search every line there ;</div>
<div class="i0">Mark every feature, — chin, lip, and forehead !</div>
<div class="i0">Look in my eyes, and tell me the lesson</div>
<div class="i0">You read there ; measure my nose, and tell me</div>
<div class="i0">Where I am wanting ! A man's nose, Dominie,</div>
<div class="i0">Is often the cast of his inward spirit ;</div>
<div class="i0">So mark mine well. But why do you smile so ?</div>
<div class="i0">Pity, or what ? Is it written all over,</div>
<div class="i0">This face of mine, with a brute's confession ?</div>
<div class="i0">Nothing but sin there ? nothing but hell-scars ?</div>
<div class="i0">Or is it because there is something better —</div>
<div class="i0">A glimmer of good, maybe — or a shadow</div>
<div class="i0">Of something that's followed me down from child-</div>
<div class="i0">hood —</div>
<div class="i0">Followed me all these years and kept me,</div>
<div class="i0">Spite of my slips and sins and follies,</div>
<div class="i0">Spite of my last red sin, my murder, —</div>
<div class="i0">Just out of hell ? Yes ? something of that kind ?</div>
<div class="i0">And you smile for that ? You're a good man, Dominie,</div>
<div class="i0">The one good man in the world who knows me,—</div>
<div class="i0">My one good friend in a world that mocks me,</div>
<div class="i0">Here in this hard stone cage. But I leave it</div>
<div class="i0">To-morrow. To-morrow ! My God ! am I crying ?</div>
<div class="i0">Are these things tears ? Tears ! What ! am I fright-</div>
<div class="i0">ened ?</div>
<div class="i0">I, who swore I should go to the scaffold</div>
<div class="i0">With big strong steps, and — No more. I thank you,</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">But no — I am all right now! No! — listen!</div>
<div class="i0">I am here to be hanged ; to be hanged to-morrow</div>
<div class="i0">At six o'clock, when the sun is rising.</div>
<div class="i0">And why am I here? Not a soul can tell you</div>
<div class="i0">But this poor shivering thing before you,</div>
<div class="i0">This fluttering wreck of the man God made him,</div>
<div class="i0">For God knows what wild reason. Hear me,</div>
<div class="i0">And learn from my lips the truth of my story.</div>
<div class="i0">There 's nothing strange in what I shall tell you,</div>
<div class="i0">Nothing mysterious, nothing unearthly, —</div>
<div class="i0">But damnably human, — and you shall hear it.</div>
<div class="i0">Not one of those little black lawyers had guessed it ;</div>
<div class="i0">The judge, with his big bald head, never knew it ;</div>
<div class="i0">And the jury (God rest their poor souls!) never</div>
<div class="i0">dreamed it.</div>
<div class="i0">Once there were three in the world who could tell it ;</div>
<div class="i0">Now there are two. There 'll be two to-morrow, —</div>
<div class="i0">You, my friend, and — But there 's the story : —</div>
<div class="i0">When I was a boy the world was heaven.</div>
<div class="i0">I never knew then that the men and the women</div>
<div class="i0">Who petted and called me a brave big fellow</div>
<div class="i0">Were ever less happy than I; but wisdom —</div>
<div class="i0">Which comes with the years, you know — soon</div>
<div class="i0">showed me</div>
<div class="i0">The secret of all my glittering childhood,</div>
<div class="i0">The broken key to the fairies' castle</div>
<div class="i0">That held my life in the fresh, glad season</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">When I was the king of the earth.  Then slowly —</div>
<div class="i0">And yet so swiftly ! — there came the knowledge</div>
<div class="i0">That the marvellous life I had lived was my life ;</div>
<div class="i0">That the glorious world I had loved was my world ;</div>
<div class="i0">And that every man, and every woman,</div>
<div class="i0">And every child was a different being,</div>
<div class="i0">Wrought with a different heat, and fired</div>
<div class="i0">With passions born of a single spirit ;</div>
<div class="i0">That the pleasure I felt was not their pleasure,</div>
<div class="i0">Nor my sorrow — a kind of nameless pity</div>
<div class="i0">For something, I knew not what — their sorrow.</div>
<div class="i0">And thus was I taught my first hard lesson, —</div>
<div class="i0">The lesson we suffer the most in learning :</div>
<div class="i0">That a happy man is a man forgetful</div>
<div class="i0">Of all the torturing ills around him.</div>
<div class="i0">When or where I first met the woman</div>
<div class="i0">I cherished and made my wife, no matter.</div>
<div class="i0">Enough to say that I found her and kept her</div>
<div class="i0">Here in my heart with as pure a devotion</div>
<div class="i0">As ever Christ felt for his brothers.  Forgive me</div>
<div class="i0">For naming His name in your patient presence ;</div>
<div class="i0">But I feel my words, and the truth I utter</div>
<div class="i0">Is God's own truth.  I loved that woman, —</div>
<div class="i0">Not for her face, but for something fairer,</div>
<div class="i0">Something diviner, I thought, than beauty :</div>
<div class="i0">I loved the spirit — the human something</div>
<div class="i0">That seemed to chime with my own condition,</div>
<div class="i0">And make soul-music when we were together ;</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">And we were never apart, from the moment</div>
<div class="i0">My eyes flashed into her eyes the message</div>
<div class="i0">That swept itself in a quivering answer</div>
<div class="i0">Back through my strange lost being.  My pulses</div>
<div class="i0">Leapt with an aching speed ; and the measure</div>
<div class="i0">Of this great world grew small and smaller,</div>
<div class="i0">Till it seemed the sky and the land and the ocean</div>
<div class="i0">Closed at last in a mist all golden</div>
<div class="i0">Around us two.  And we stood for a season</div>
<div class="i0">Like gods outflung from chaos, dreaming</div>
<div class="i0">That we were the king and the queen of the fire</div>
<div class="i0">That reddened the clouds of love that held us</div>
<div class="i0">Blind to the new world soon to be ours —</div>
<div class="i0">Ours to seize and sway.  The passion</div>
<div class="i0">Of that great love was a nameless passion,</div>
<div class="i0">Bright as the blaze of the sun at noonday,</div>
<div class="i0">Wild as the flames of hell ; but, mark you,</div>
<div class="i0">Never a whit less pure for its fervor.</div>
<div class="i0">The baseness in me (for I was human)</div>
<div class="i0">Burned like a worm, and perished ; and nothing</div>
<div class="i0">Was left me then but a soul that mingled</div>
<div class="i0">Itself with hers, and swayed and shuddered</div>
<div class="i0">In fearful triumph.  When I consider</div>
<div class="i0">That helpless love and the cursed folly</div>
<div class="i0">That wrecked my life for the sake of a woman</div>
<div class="i0">Who broke with a laugh the chains of her marriage</div>
<div class="i0">(Whatever the word may mean), I wonder</div>
<div class="i0">If all the woe was her sin, or whether</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">The chains themselves were enough to lead her</div>
<div class="i0">In love's despite to break them. . . . Sinners</div>
<div class="i0">And saints — I say — are rocked in the cradle,</div>
<div class="i0">But never are known till the will within them</div>
<div class="i0">Speaks in its own good time. So I foster</div>
<div class="i0">Even to-night for the woman who wronged me,</div>
<div class="i0">Nothing of hate, nor of love, but a feeling</div>
<div class="i0">Of still regret ; for the man — But hear me,</div>
<div class="i0">And judge for yourself : —</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i2">For a time the seasons</div>
<div class="i0">Changed and passed in a sweet succession</div>
<div class="i0">That seemed to me like an endless music :</div>
<div class="i0">Life was a rolling psalm, and the choirs</div>
<div class="i0">Of God were glad for our love. I fancied</div>
<div class="i0">All this, and more than I dare to tell you</div>
<div class="i0">To-night, — yes, more than I dare to remember ;</div>
<div class="i0">And then — well, the music stopped. There are</div>
<div class="i1">moments</div>
<div class="i0">In all men's lives when it stops, I fancy, —</div>
<div class="i0">Or seems to stop, — till it comes to cheer them</div>
<div class="i0">Again with a larger sound. The curtain</div>
<div class="i0">Of life just then is lifted a little</div>
<div class="i0">To give to their sight new joys — new sorrows —</div>
<div class="i0">Or nothing at all, sometimes. I was watching</div>
<div class="i0">The slow, sweet scenes of a golden picture,</div>
<div class="i0">Flushed and alive with a long delusion</div>
<div class="i0">That made the murmur of home, when I shuddered</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">And felt like a knife that awful silence</div>
<div class="i0">That comes when the music goes — forever.</div>
<div class="i0">The truth came over my life like a darkness</div>
<div class="i0">Over a forest where one man wanders,</div>
<div class="i0">Worse than alone.  For a time I staggered</div>
<div class="i0">And stumbled on with a weak persistence</div>
<div class="i0">After the phantom of hope that darted</div>
<div class="i0">And dodged like a frightened thing before me,</div>
<div class="i0">To quit me at last, and vanish.  Nothing</div>
<div class="i0">Was left me then but the curse of living</div>
<div class="i0">And bearing through all my days the fever</div>
<div class="i0">And thirst of a poisoned love.  Were I stronger,</div>
<div class="i0">Or weaker, perhaps my scorn had saved me,</div>
<div class="i0">Given me strength to crush my sorrow</div>
<div class="i0">With hate for her and the world that praised her —</div>
<div class="i0">To have left her, then and there — to have conquered</div>
<div class="i0">That old false life with a new and a wiser, —</div>
<div class="i0">Such things are easy in words.  You listen,</div>
<div class="i0">And frown, I suppose, that I never mention</div>
<div class="i0">That beautiful word, forgive! — I forgave her</div>
<div class="i0">First of all; and I praised kind Heaven</div>
<div class="i0">That I was a brave, clean man to do it;</div>
<div class="i0">And then I tried to forget.  Forgiveness!</div>
<div class="i0">What does it mean when the one forgiven</div>
<div class="i0">Shivers and weeps and clings and kisses</div>
<div class="i0">The credulous fool that holds her, and tells him</div>
<div class="i0">A thousand things of a good man's mercy,</div>
<div class="i0">And then slips off with a laugh and plunges</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Back to the sin she has quit for a season,</div>
<div class="i0">To tell him that hell and the world are better</div>
<div class="i0">For her than a prophet's heaven ?  Believe me,</div>
<div class="i0">The love that dies ere its flames are wasted</div>
<div class="i0">In search of an alien soul is better,</div>
<div class="i0">Better by far than the lonely passion</div>
<div class="i0">That burns back into the heart that feeds it.</div>
<div class="i0">For I loved her still, and the more she mocked me, —</div>
<div class="i0">Fooled with her endless pleading promise</div>
<div class="i0">Of future faith, — the more I believed her</div>
<div class="i0">The penitent thing she seemed ; and the stronger</div>
<div class="i0">Her choking arms and her small hot kisses</div>
<div class="i0">Bound me and burned my brain to pity,</div>
<div class="i0">The more she grew to the heavenly creature</div>
<div class="i0">That brightened the life I had lost forever.</div>
<div class="i0">The truth was gone somehow for the moment ;</div>
<div class="i0">The curtain fell for a time ; and I fancied</div>
<div class="i0">We were again like gods together,</div>
<div class="i0">Loving again with the old glad rapture.</div>
<div class="i0">But scenes like these, too often repeated,</div>
<div class="i0">Failed at last, and her guile was wasted.</div>
<div class="i0">I made an end of her shrewd caresses</div>
<div class="i0">And told her a few straight words.  She took them</div>
<div class="i0">Full at their worth — and the farce was over.</div>
<div class="i0">.        .        .        .        .</div>
<div class="i0">At first my dreams of the past upheld me,</div>
<div class="i0">But they were a short support : the present</div>
<div class="i0">Pushed them away, and I fell.  The mission</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Of life (whatever it was) was blasted ;</div>
<div class="i0">My game was lost. And I met the winner</div>
<div class="i0">Of that foul deal as a sick slave gathers</div>
<div class="i0">His painful strength at the sight of his master ;</div>
<div class="i0">And when he was past I cursed him, fearful</div>
<div class="i0">Of that strange chance which makes us mighty</div>
<div class="i0">Or mean, or both. I cursed him and hated</div>
<div class="i0">The stones he pressed with his heel ; I followed</div>
<div class="i0">His easy march with a backward envy,</div>
<div class="i0">And cursed myself for the beast within me.</div>
<div class="i0">But pride is the master of love, and the vision</div>
<div class="i0">Of those old days grew faint and fainter :</div>
<div class="i0">The counterfeit wife my mercy sheltered</div>
<div class="i0">Was nothing now but a woman, — a woman</div>
<div class="i0">Out of my way and out of my nature.</div>
<div class="i0">My battle with blinded love was over,</div>
<div class="i0">My battle with aching pride beginning.</div>
<div class="i0">If I was the loser at first, I wonder</div>
<div class="i0">If I am the winner now ! . . . I doubt it.</div>
<div class="i0">My life is a losing game ; and to-morrow —</div>
<div class="i0">To-morrow ! — Christ ! did I say to-morrow ? . . .</div>
<div class="i0">Is your brandy good for death ? . . . There, — listen : —</div>
<div class="i0">When loves goes out, and a man is driven</div>
<div class="i0">To shun mankind for the scars that make him</div>
<div class="i0">A joke for all chattering tongues, he carries</div>
<div class="i0">A double burden. The woes I suffered</div>
<div class="i0">After that hard betrayal made me</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Pity, at first, all breathing creatures</div>
<div class="i0">On this bewildered earth. I studied</div>
<div class="i0">Their faces and made for myself the story</div>
<div class="i0">Of all their scattered lives. Like brothers</div>
<div class="i0">And sisters they seemed to me then ; and I nourished</div>
<div class="i0">A stranger friendship wrought in my fancy</div>
<div class="i0">Between those people and me. But somehow,</div>
<div class="i0">As time went on, there came queer glances</div>
<div class="i0">Out of their eyes, and the shame that stung me</div>
<div class="i0">Harassed my pride with a crazed impression</div>
<div class="i0">That every face in the surging city</div>
<div class="i0">Was turned to me ; and I saw sly whispers,</div>
<div class="i0">Now and then, as I walked and wearied</div>
<div class="i0">My wasted life twice over in bearing</div>
<div class="i0">With all my sorrow the sorrows of others, —</div>
<div class="i0">Till I found myself their fool. Then I trembled, —</div>
<div class="i0">A poor scared thing, — and their prying faces</div>
<div class="i0">Told me the ghastly truth : they were laughing</div>
<div class="i0">At me and my fate. My God, I could feel it —</div>
<div class="i0">That laughter ! And then the children caught it ;</div>
<div class="i0">And I, like a struck dog, crept and listened.</div>
<div class="i0">And then when I met the man who had weakened</div>
<div class="i0">A woman's love to his own desire,</div>
<div class="i0">It seemed to me that all hell were laughing</div>
<div class="i0">In fiendish concert ! I was their victim —</div>
<div class="i0">And his, and hate's. And there was the struggle !</div>
<div class="i0">As long as the earth we tread holds something</div>
<div class="i0">A tortured heart can love, the meaning</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Of life is not wholly blurred ; but after</div>
<div class="i0">The last loved thing in the world has left us,</div>
<div class="i0">We know the triumph of hate.  The glory</div>
<div class="i0">Of good goes out forever ; the beacon</div>
<div class="i0">Of sin is the light that leads us downward —</div>
<div class="i0">Down to the fiery end.  The road runs</div>
<div class="i0">Right through hell ; and the souls that follow</div>
<div class="i0">The cursed ways where its windings lead them</div>
<div class="i0">Suffer enough, I say, to merit</div>
<div class="i0">All grace that a God can give. — The fashion</div>
<div class="i0">Of our belief is to lift all beings</div>
<div class="i0">Born for a life that knows no struggle</div>
<div class="i0">In sin's tight snares to eternal glory —</div>
<div class="i0">All apart from the branded millions</div>
<div class="i0">Who carry through life their faces graven</div>
<div class="i0">With sure brute scars that tell the story</div>
<div class="i0">Of their foul, fated passions.  Science</div>
<div class="i0">Has yet no salve to smooth or soften</div>
<div class="i0">The cradle-scars of a tyrant's visage ;</div>
<div class="i0">No drug to purge from the vital essence</div>
<div class="i0">Of souls the sleeping venom.  Virtue</div>
<div class="i0">May flower in hell, when its roots are twisted</div>
<div class="i0">And wound with the roots of vice ; but the stronger</div>
<div class="i0">Never is known till there comes that battle</div>
<div class="i0">With sin to prove the victor.  Perilous</div>
<div class="i0">Things are these demons we call our passions :</div>
<div class="i0">Slaves are we of their roving fancies,</div>
<div class="i0">Fools of their devilish glee. — You think me,</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">I know, in this maundering way designing</div>
<div class="i0">To lighten the load of my guilt and cast it</div>
<div class="i0">Half on the shoulders of God.  But hear me!</div>
<div class="i0">I'm partly a man, — for all my weakness, —</div>
<div class="i0">If weakness it were to stand and murder</div>
<div class="i0">Before men's eyes the man who had murdered</div>
<div class="i0">Me, and driven my burning forehead</div>
<div class="i0">With horns for the world to laugh at.  Trust me!</div>
<div class="i0">And try to believe my words but a portion</div>
<div class="i0">Of what God's purpose made me!  The coward</div>
<div class="i0">Within me cries for this ; and I beg you</div>
<div class="i0">Now, as I come to the end, to remember</div>
<div class="i0">That women and men are on earth to travel</div>
<div class="i0">All on a different road.  Hereafter</div>
<div class="i0">The roads may meet. . . . I trust in something —</div>
<div class="i0">I know not what. . . .</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i1">Well, this was the way of it : —</div>
<div class="i0">Stung with the shame and the secret fury</div>
<div class="i0">That comes to the man who has thrown his pittance</div>
<div class="i0">Of self at a traitor's feet, I wandered</div>
<div class="i0">Weeks and weeks in a baffled frenzy,</div>
<div class="i0">Till at last the devil spoke.  I heard him,</div>
<div class="i0">And laughed at the love that strove to touch me, —</div>
<div class="i0">The dead, lost love; and I gripped the demon</div>
<div class="i0">Close to my breast, and held him, praising</div>
<div class="i0">The fates and the furies that gave me the courage</div>
<div class="i0">To follow his wild command.  Forgetful</div>
<div class="i0">6                                81</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Of all to come when the work was over,—</div>
<div class="i0">There came to me then no stony vision</div>
<div class="i0">Of these three hundred days, — I cherished</div>
<div class="i0">An awful joy in my brain.  I pondered</div>
<div class="i0">And weighed the thing in my mind, and gloried</div>
<div class="i0">In life to think that I was to conquer</div>
<div class="i0">Death at his own dark door, — and chuckled</div>
<div class="i0">To think of it done so cleanly.  One evening</div>
<div class="i0">I knew that my time had come.  I shuddered</div>
<div class="i0">A little, but rather for doubt than terror,</div>
<div class="i0">And followed him, — led by the nameless devil</div>
<div class="i0">I worshipped and called my brother.  The city</div>
<div class="i0">Shone like a dream that night ; the windows</div>
<div class="i0">Flashed with a piercing flame, and the pavements</div>
<div class="i0">Pulsed and swayed with a warmth — or something</div>
<div class="i0">That seemed so then to my feet — and thrilled me</div>
<div class="i0">With a quick, dizzy joy ; and the women</div>
<div class="i0">And men, like marvellous things of magic,</div>
<div class="i0">Floated and laughed and sang by my shoulder,</div>
<div class="i0">Sent with a wizard motion.  Through it</div>
<div class="i0">And over and under it all there sounded</div>
<div class="i0">A murmur of life, like bees ; and I listened</div>
<div class="i0">And laughed again to think of the flower</div>
<div class="i0">That grew, blood-red, for me ! . . . This fellow</div>
<div class="i0">Was one of the popular sort who flourish</div>
<div class="i0">Unruffled where gods would fall.  For a conscience</div>
<div class="i0">He carried a snug deceit that made him</div>
<div class="i0">The man of the time and the place, whatever</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">The time or the place might be.  Were he sounding,</div>
<div class="i0">With a genial craft that cloaked its purpose,</div>
<div class="i0">Nigh to itself, the depth of a woman</div>
<div class="i0">Fooled with his brainless art, or sending</div>
<div class="i0">The midnight home with songs and bottles, —</div>
<div class="i0">The cad was there, and his ease forever</div>
<div class="i0">Shone with the smooth and slippery polish</div>
<div class="i0">That tells the snake.  That night he drifted</div>
<div class="i0">Into an up-town haunt and ordered —</div>
<div class="i0">Whatever it was — with a soft assurance</div>
<div class="i0">That made me mad as I stood behind him,</div>
<div class="i0">Gripping his death, and waited.  Coward,</div>
<div class="i0">I think, is the name the world has given</div>
<div class="i0">To men like me ; but I 'll swear I never</div>
<div class="i0">Thought of my own disgrace when I shot him —</div>
<div class="i0">Yes, in the back, — I know it, I know it</div>
<div class="i0">Now ; but what if I do ? . . . As I watched him</div>
<div class="i0">Lying there dead in the scattered sawdust,</div>
<div class="i0">Wet with a day's blown froth, I noted</div>
<div class="i0">That things were still ; that the walnut tables,</div>
<div class="i0">Where men but a moment before were sitting,</div>
<div class="i0">Were gone ; that a screen of something around me</div>
<div class="i0">Shut them out of my sight.  But the gilded</div>
<div class="i0">Signs of a hundred beers and whiskeys</div>
<div class="i0">Flashed from the walls above, and the mirrors</div>
<div class="i0">And glasses behind the bar were lighted</div>
<div class="i0">In some strange way, and into my spirit</div>
<div class="i0">A thousand shafts of terrible fire</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i0">Burned like death, and I fell.  The story</div>
<div class="i0">Of what came then, you know.</div>
</div>
<div class="stanza">
<div class="i1">But tell me,</div>
<div class="i0">What does the whole thing mean ?  What are we, —</div>
<div class="i0">Slaves of an awful ignorance ? puppets</div>
<div class="i0">Pulled by a fiend ? or gods, without knowing it ?</div>
<div class="i0">Do we shut from ourselves our own salvation, —</div>
<div class="i0">Or what do we do !  I tell you, Dominie,</div>
<div class="i0">There are times in the lives of us poor devils</div>
<div class="i0">When heaven and hell get mixed.  Though conscience</div>
<div class="i0">May come like a whisper of Christ to warn us</div>
<div class="i0">Away from our sins, it is lost or laughed at, —</div>
<div class="i0">And then we fall.  And for all who have fallen —</div>
<div class="i0">Even for him — I hold no malice,</div>
<div class="i0">Nor much compassion : a mightier mercy</div>
<div class="i0">Than mine must shrive him. — And I — I am going</div>
<div class="i0">Into the light ? — or into the darkness ?</div>
<div class="i0">Why do I sit through these sickening hours,</div>
<div class="i0">And hope ?  Good God ! are they hours ? — hours ?</div>
<div class="i0">Yes !  I am done with days.  And to-morrow —</div>
<div class="i0">We two may meet !  To-morrow ! — To-mor-</div>
<div class="i0">row ! . . .</div>
</div>
</div>
</section>
	</body>
</html>

