<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Luke Havergal</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Luke Havergal</h2>
			<div class="poetry">
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">Go to the western gate, Luke Havergal⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">There where the vines cling crimson on the wall⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">And in the twilight wait for what will come.</div>
					<div class="i0">The wind will moan, the leaves will whisper some⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Whisper of her, and strike you as they fall ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But go, and if you trust her she will call.</div>
					<div class="i0">Go to the western gate, Luke Havergal⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Luke Havergal.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies</div>
					<div class="i0">To rift the fiery night that’s in your eyes ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But there, where western glooms are gathering,</div>
					<div class="i0">The dark will end the dark, if anything :</div>
					<div class="i0">God slays Himself with every leaf that flies,</div>
					<div class="i0">And hell is more than half of paradise.</div>
					<div class="i0">No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">In eastern skies.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">Out of a grave I come to tell you this⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Out of a grave I come to quench the kiss</div>
					<div class="i0">That flames upon your forehead with a glow</div>
					<div class="i0">That blinds you to the way that you must go.</div>
					<div class="i0">Yes, there is yet one way to where she is⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Bitter, but one that faith can never miss.</div>
					<div class="i0">Out of a grave I come to tell you this⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">To tell you this.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<div class="i0">There is the western gate, Luke Havergal,</div>
					<div class="i0">There are the crimson leaves upon the wall.</div>
					<div class="i0">Go⁠—for the winds are tearing them away⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Nor think to riddle the dead words they say,</div>
					<div class="i0">Nor any more to feel them as they fall ;</div>
					<div class="i0">But go ! and if you trust her she will call.</div>
					<div class="i0">There is the western gate, Luke Havergal⁠—</div>
					<div class="i0">Luke Havergal.</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
